STRUCTURE

The first part of this demonstration (Part A) is focused on presenting a basic stock market exploratory data analysis which allows the identification and/or interpretation of key/main characteristics of a dataset, by employing data vizualitation techniques in python (Jupyter Notebook) with the use of libraries such as 'seaborn' and 'matplotlib'. The datasets features are based on the 'open','close','high','low' and 'volume' prices obtained from three banks: i) Bank of America (BAC), ii) Wells Fargo (WFC) and iii) Capital One (COF). The Date Range of each of the aforementioned datasets has been selected to be from January 2010 to December 2019. The analysis comprises a) key data feature vizualization plots such as Histogram and Kernel Density Estimation Plots, b) Moving Average and Exponential Weighted Moving Average plots, c) Scatterplots, presenting the relationships/correlations between dataset features, d) price chart in the form of a 'Candlestick' to provide the 'open','close','high' and'low' prices of each stock by indicating the price movement for a selected time index, e) 'Daily Return' (Volatility) plots by determining the time series first difference (price change from a time period to the next) and f) 'Cumulative Return' plots that are related to all examined bank stocks.

The second part of this project (Part B) comprises a time series forecasting demonstration based on two predictive models: a) Seasonal Autoregressive Moving Average (SARIMA) and b) Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU). The scope of both case studies is to use the average Weekly Capital One 'Cumulative Return' prices so as to investigate and assess: a) the models predictive capabilities, by fitting/training them with 9 years of past average weekly data from January 2010 to December 2018, so as to predict the average Weekly Capital One 'Cumulative Return' values of the next 52 weeks (January-December 2019) and b) the SARIMA and GRU forecasting capabilities, by fitting/training these models with all dataset samples (increase in training set size) to forecast the average Weekly Capital One 'Cumulative Return' prices for a prediction horizon of 52 weeks (future sequence of observations, January-December 2020). In terms of the SARIMA time series forecasting case study, tests for stationarity are provided (rolling mean,rolling standard deviation,Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test) based on first difference, seasonal difference and seasonal first difference. In addition, seasonal decomposition of the time series is presented, together with autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation plots to to determine the value of the moving average and the autoregressive part of the Seasonal ARIMA model respectively. Regarding the GRU model, there is use of the Keras time series generator to create the training input-target sequence of the deep neural network. The evaluation of the model performance for the case where the prediction horizon is known is based on the comparison of the forecasted values with the test(actual/target)values (Performance Metric --> Root Mean Squared Error). The model training performance is also provided (Training relative error percentage distribution plots and relative error summary statistics).

The Datasets (pandas dataframe) have been obtained from the Pandas datareader package that enables the creation of a dataframe from internet sources, in this case from Yahoo! Finance
